Node.js is a powerful, open-source, and cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment built on Chrome's V8 engine. It allows you to run JavaScript code outside the browser, making it ideal for building scalable server-side and networking applications.

JavaScript was mainly used for frontend development earlier. With Node.js (introduced in 2009), JavaScript became a backend language as well.
Non-blocking, event-driven architecture for high performance.
Supports the creation of REST APIs, real-time applications, and microservices.
Comes with a rich library of modules through npm (Node Package Manager).
apriori_algorithm_9.webpapriori_algorithm_9.webp
Note: Deploy Node.js applications on Hostinger’s VPS hosting for top-notch performance. Enjoy high-speed NVMe SSD storage and AMD EPYC processors for faster execution. Hostinger’s platform offers scalability, full control, and industry-standard KVM virtualization. Benefit from a 300 Mb/s network for seamless connectivity. Visit the website to get started now.

To start with Node.js, you need to install and set it up on your machine. Follow these articles to install, depending on your system:

How to Install Node.js on Windows?
Installation of Node.js on Linux
How to Install NodeJS on MacOS
Let us now take a look at our first code example.


// Import the http module
const http = require("http");

// Create a server
const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
    res.statusCode = 200;
    res.setHeader("Content-Type", "text/plain");
    res.end("Welcome to the Node.js Tutorial");
});

// Listen on port 3000
server.listen(3000, () => {
    console.log(
        "Server is running on http://localhost:3000");
});
It will start a server, and when you visit http://localhost:3000, it will display

Welcome to the Node.js Tutorial
The http module is imported to create a basic HTTP server.
The createServer() method is used to handle incoming requests and send responses.
The server listens on port 3000, and a message is displayed in the browser when accessed.
Why Learn Node.js
It Enables the use of JavaScript for both frontend and backend development.
It Supports building real-time applications like chat apps and gaming servers.
It Provides high scalability for I/O-heavy applications.
It Backed by a vibrant community and extensive library support
Introduction to Node.js
Prerequisites: JavaScript and basic knowledge of web development

Basics of Node.js
Node.js Introduction
Why Node.js?
How Node.js Works?
NPM (Node.jsPackage Manager)
Installation of Node.js on Linux
Installation of Node.js on Windows
Basics
First Application
REPL
modules
Core modules
Third Party modules
Custom modules
Blocking and Non-Blocking
Callback Concept
Debugging
Set Console Font Color
Web Server
Create and Publish NPM packages
Difference Between –save and –save-dev
Event Loop
Frameworks
Promise Chaining
This Binding
Global Objects
Automatic Restart Server with Nodemon
Child Process
Global Installation of Dependencies
Session Variable
Node.js Complete References
Assert
Buffer
Console
Crypto
DNS
File System
Globals Objects
HTTP Module
HTTP2
OS
Path Module
Process
Query String
Stream
String Decoder
Timers Module
TLS/SSL Module
UDP/DataGram
URL
Utility
V8
VM Module
Zlib
Also Check: Recent Articles on Node.js

Node.js Interview Questions
Interview Questions and Answers – Beginner Level
Interview Questions and Answers – Intermediate Level
Interview Questions and Answers – Advanced Level
Node.js Online Quiz Questions
Quiz | Set-1
Quiz | Set-2
Quiz | Set-3
Node.js Projects
Library Management System
User Management System
Stock Market Portfolio App
Chat App using socket.io
Mail sender
Task Manager
Video Call App
AI Whatsapp Bot
Real Time News Aggregator
Careers with Node.js
Around 6 million websites use Node.js, it is growing day by day. Most of the eCommerce, and IoT companies looking for pro Node.js developer.

Accenture
Google
Cognizant
HCL Technologies
Capgemini
IBM India
Microsoft India
Amazon India
Adobe Inc
Oracle Inc
Intel India
Deloitte India
Cisco Systems Inc
Node.js Advantages
Easy Scalability: It compiles and executes JavaScript at lightning speeds, making it highly scalable.
Real-time Web Apps: It enables real-time communication for chat, gaming, social media updates, and more.
Microservices: It is lightweight and ideal for microservice architectures.
JavaScript Everywhere: It Learn JavaScript once, and you can use it both for front-end and back-end development.
Efficient Data Streaming: It efficiently handles I/O processes like media transcoding during uploads.
Event-Driven Architecture: Unlike traditional servers, Node.js handles concurrent requests effectively.
Strong Community Support: It has an independent community backing its development.
Important Links
Careers and Jobs in Node.js
Companies That Use Node.js
Node.js vs Django vs Spring
