Express.js is a minimal and flexible Node.js web application framework that provides a list of features for building web and mobile applications easily. It simplifies the development of server-side applications by offering an easy-to-use API for routing, middleware, and HTTP utilities.

Built on Node.js for fast and scalable server-side development.
Simplifies routing and middleware handling for web applications.
Supports building REST APIs, real-time applications, and single-page applications.
Provides a lightweight structure for flexible and efficient server-side development.
working_of_ai.webpworking_of_ai.webp
Learn how to install Node.js on Windows, Linux, and macOS, and also how to  Setup Express in a Node project.

First Express.js Program
Here’s how you can start with a basic Express.js application:


// Import Express
const express = require('express');
const app = express();

// Define a route
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.send('Welcome to the Express.js Tutorial');
});

// Start the server
app.listen(3000, () => {
    console.log('Server is running on http://localhost:3000');
});
It will start a server, and when you visit http://localhost:3000, it will display

Welcome to the Express.js Tutorial
In this example:

Express is imported using require('express'), and an app instance is created with express().
A route is defined using the app.get() method, which responds with a message when the root URL (/) is accessed.
The app.listen() method starts the server and listens on port 3000 for incoming requests.
Express Basic
Express.js is a minimal and flexible Node.js framework used to build web applications and APIs. It's known for its simplicity and high flexibility in handling HTTP requests.

Introduction
Steps to create Express Application
Design first Application using Express
How to Structure my Application in Express JS 
Unique features of Express
How to send response from server to client using Node and Express ?
Why Express ‘app’ and ‘server’ files kept separately ?
How to implement JWT authentication in Express app
How to expire session after 1 min of inactivity in express-session of Express JS
Express Error Handling
Express Functions
Explore the essential functions that make Express flexible and powerful. Learn how to handle various HTTP request methods and middleware.

Express express() Function
express.raw() Function
express.Router() Function
express.static() Function
express.text() Function
express.urlencoded() Function
express() function Complete Reference
Express Applications Function
Understand the properties and methods of Express applications that allow configuration and response handling.

app.locals Property
app.mountpath Property
Mount Event
app.all() Function
app.delete() Function
app.disable() Function
app.disabled() Function
app.enable() Function
app.enabled() Function
Application Complete Reference
Express Requests Function
Get to know the request properties and methods used to handle incoming requests and extract data.

req.app Property
req.baseUrl Property
req.body Property
req.cookies Property
req.fresh Property
req.accepts() Function
req.acceptsCharsets() Function
req.acceptsEncodings() Function
req.acceptsLanguages() Function
Request Complete Reference
Express Response Function
Learn how to respond to HTTP requests with different status codes, cookies, and other HTTP headers.

res.app Property
res.headersSent Property
res.locals Property
res.append() Function
res.attachment() Function
res.cookie() Function
res.clearCookie() Function
res.download() Function
res.end() Function
Response Complete Reference
Express Router Function
Understand how to create and use routers to define reusable routing logic.

router.all() Function
router.METHOD() Function
router.param() function
router.route() Function
router.use() Function
Router Complete Reference
Express Advanced Topics
After learning routing and basic concepts, let's explore some advanced topics like middleware, authentication, and integrating Express with other technologies.

Node vs Express
HTTP request and response cycle
Middlewares in Express
How to update record in Cassandra using Express 
What is the use of next() function in Express JS
How to create custom middleware in express
Why Express is used in Web Development
What is Express Generator
Express HTTP methods
How to create routes using Express and Postman?
Why Express Is Used For Enterprise App Development
REST API using the Express to perform CRUD
What is express-session middleware in Express
Express.js For Interview
Top 50 Express.js Interview Questions and Answers
Express JS Exercises, Practice Questions and Solutions
Features of Express
Middleware and Routing: Define clear pathways (routes) within your application to handle incoming HTTP requests (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE).
Minimalistic Design: Express.js follows a simple and minimalistic design philosophy. This simplicity allows you to quickly set up a server, define routes, and handle HTTP requests efficiently.
Flexibility and Customization: Express.js doesn’t impose a strict application architecture. You can structure your code according to your preferences.
Templating Power: Incorporate templating engines like Jade or EJS to generate dynamic HTML content, enhancing user experience.
Static File Serving: Effortlessly serve static files like images, CSS, and JavaScript from a designated directory within your application.
Node.js Integration: Express.js seamlessly integrates with the core functionalities of Node.js, allowing you to harness the power of asynchronous programming and event-driven architecture.
Applications of Express
Express.js empowers you to construct a wide array of web applications. Here are some captivating examples:

RESTful APIs: Develop robust APIs that adhere to the REST architectural style, enabling communication with other applications and front-end interfaces.
Real-time Applications: Leverage Express.js's event-driven nature to create real-time applications like chat or collaborative editing tools.
Single-Page Applications (SPAs): Craft SPAs that fetch and update content dynamically on the client-side, offering a seamless user experience.
Express.js vs Other Frameworks
Feature	Express.js	Django	Ruby on Rails
Language	JavaScript	Python	Ruby
Flexibility	High (Unopinionated)	Moderate (Opinionated)	Low (Highly Opinionated)
Performance	High	Moderate	Moderate
Middleware Support	Extensive	Limited	Limited
Use Case	APIs, Web Apps	Full-stack Development	Full-stack Development
