MongoDB is a popular document-oriented NoSQL database that stores data in a flexible BSON format, enabling fast and efficient storage and retrieval. It is available under the SSPL, which is not recognized as an open-source license by the Open Source Initiative due to commercial use restrictions.

mongo_introduction
A simple MongoDB document Structure: 

{
  "_id": 1,
  "title": "Geeksforgeeks",
  "author": "John Smith",
  "url": "https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/",
  "tags": ["NoSQL", "Database", "Tutorial"],
  "published": true,
  "views": 1500
}
In the above structure:

_id: Unique identifier for the document.
title, author, url: Basic fields storing strings.
tags: An array of strings.
published: A Boolean value.
views: A number representing views or count.
How MongoDB Works
In a MongoDB sharded cluster, the components work together as follows:

working-of-mongo
Client Application: The application sends requests to MongoDB to read or write data.
Query Router (mongos): The query router receives the client request and determines which shard should handle it.
Config Servers: Store metadata about the cluster, including which data resides on which shard.
Shards: Data is horizontally distributed across replica sets, with the primary handling writes and secondaries providing replication and reads.
Primary Node: Handles all write operations.
Secondary Nodes: Replicate data from the primary for high availability and read operations.
Basic SQL Operations
MongoDB provides several basic operations to manage and manipulate data efficiently:

Create (Insert): Add new documents to a collection.
Read (Find): Retrieve documents from a collection based on query criteria.
Update: Modify existing documents in a collection.
Delete: Remove documents from a collection.
Features of the MongoDB database
MongoDB offers several key features that make it efficient and scalable:

Document Oriented: Stores all related data together in a single, flexible document rather than multiple tables.
Indexing: Enables fast queries by avoiding full collection scans, crucial for handling large data efficiently.
Scalability: Uses sharding to distribute data across multiple servers; easily add new machines to expand.
Replication and High Availability: Stores multiple data copies on different servers for redundancy and fault tolerance.
Aggregation: Processes and summarizes data (like SQL GROUP BY) using operations such as sum, avg, min, and max.
