JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a lightweight, text-based data format used for representing structured data. It is one of the most widely used formats for data interchange between clients and servers in web applications. JSON has replaced XML as the preferred data format due to its simplicity, compactness, and ease of use.

Why is JSON?
JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation. It is a format for structuring data. This format is used by different web applications to communicate with each other. JSON is the replacement of the XML data exchange format in JSON. It is easy to struct the data compare to XML.

It supports data structures like arrays and objects and the JSON documents that are rapidly executed on the server. It is also a Language-Independent format that is derived from JavaScript. The official media type for the JSON is application/json and to save those file .json extension.

JSON Introduction
Key Features of JSON
Human-readable: JSON is easy to understand and write, making it suitable for developers and non-developers alike.
Compact format: It is a lightweight data format that reduces bandwidth and enhances performance in data exchanges.
Cross-platform support: JSON is supported by virtually all modern programming languages and platforms, including browsers, mobile apps, and servers.
Flexible data types: JSON supports strings, numbers, arrays, objects, booleans, and null values, making it highly versatile for various use cases.
Text-based format: JSON is a text-based format, making it simple to transmit over HTTP protocols.
JSON Syntax and Structure
JSON follows a simple structure, which consists of two primary data types: objects and arrays. Data is in name/value pairs and they are separated by commas. It uses curly brackets to hold the objects and square brackets to hold the arrays.

Objects in JSON
A JSON object is a collection of key-value pairs enclosed in curly braces {}. The key is a string, and the value can be a variety of data types such as strings, numbers, arrays, or even other objects.

{
    "name": "John Doe",
    "age": 30,
    "isStudent": false
}
Arrays in JSON
A JSON array is an ordered list of values enclosed in square brackets []. The values inside an array can be of any data type, including strings, numbers, and objects.

{
    "fruits": ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]
}
Example:

{
    "Courses": [
        {
            "Name" : "Java Foundation",
            "Created by" : "Geeksforgeeks",
            "Content" : [ "Java Core", "JSP",
                        "Servlets", "Collections" ]
        },

        {
            "Name" : "Data Structures",
            "also known as" : "Interview Preparation Course",
            "Topics" : [ "Trees", "Graphs", "Maps" ]
        }
    ]
}
Advantages of JSON:
JSON stores all the data in an array so data transfer makes easier. That’s why JSON is the best for sharing data of any size even audio, video, etc.
Its syntax is very easy to use. Its syntax is very small and light-weighted that’s the reason that it executes and response in a faster way.
JSON has a wide range for the browser support compatibility with the operating systems, it doesn’t require much effort to make it all browser compatible.
On the server-side parsing the most important part that developers want, if the parsing will be fast on the server side then the user can get the fast response, so in this case JSON server-side parsing is the strong point compare tot others.
Disadvantages of JSON:
The main disadvantage for JSON is that there is no error handling in JSON, if there was a slight mistake in the JSON script then you will not get the structured data.
JSON becomes quite dangerous when you used it with some unauthorized browsers. Like JSON service return a JSON file wrapped in a function call that has to be executed by the browsers if the browsers are unauthorized then your data can be hacked.
JSON has limited supported tools that we can use during JSON development.
JSON vs XML: Which is Better?
Feature	JSON	XML
Readability	Easy to read and write	More verbose and complex
Size	Smaller, lightweight	Larger due to additional tags
Parsing Speed	Faster parsing	Slower parsing
Data Representation	Based on key-value pairs	Based on tags and attributes
Support	Broadly supported	Supported, but less efficient for data exchange
JSON is generally preferred over XML due to its simpler syntax, smaller file sizes, and faster parsing speed.

Conclusion
JSON has become the standard format for data interchange in web applications, APIs, and cloud-based systems due to its lightweight nature, ease of use, and versatility. Whether we're working on front-end or back-end development, understanding how to work with JSON is crucial for efficiently handling data. With its simple syntax, broad compatibility, and speed advantages, JSON is the go-to format for modern web development. Although it has a few limitations, like the lack of error handling and potential security risks, these can be mitigated through best practices.

