Installing MongoDB on Windows involves downloading the official MongoDB installer, running it to set up the server, and configuring it to run as a Windows service. Once installed, you can use the MongoDB shell or Compass GUI to interact with your databases. This process ensures MongoDB is ready for development or production use on a Windows system.

Requirements for Installing MongoDB on Windows
Before installing MongoDB on Windows, ensure your system meets the following requirements:

1. Supported Versions
MongoDB 4.4 or higher (64-bit only).
2. Compatible Operating Systems
Windows Server 2022
Windows Server 2019
Windows 11
2. Permissions Required
The user running MongoDB services (mongod, mongos) must have membership in the following groups:

Performance Monitor Users
Performance Log Users
How to Install MongoDB on Windows Using MSI
To install MongoDB on Windows, first, download the MongoDB server and then install the MongoDB shell. The Steps below explain the installation process in detail and provide the required resources for the smooth download and install MongoDB.

Step 1: Download MongoDB Community Server
Go to the MongoDB Download Center to download the MongoDB Community Server.

install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Here, You can select any version, Windows, and package according to your requirement. For Windows, we need to choose:

Version: 7.0.4
OS: Windows x64
Package: msi
Step 2: Install MongoDB
When the download is complete open the msi file and click the next button in the startup screen:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Now accept the End-User License Agreement and click the next button:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Now select the complete option to install all the program features. Here, if you can want to install only selected program features and want to select the location of the installation, then use the Custom option:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Step 3: Configure MongoDB Service
Select “Run service as Network Service user” and copy the path of the data directory. Click Next:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Click the Install button to start the MongoDB installation process:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

After clicking on the install button installation of MongoDB begins:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Step 4: Complete Installation
Now click the Finish button to complete the MongoDB installation process:
Step 5: Set Environment Variables
Now we go to the location where MongoDB installed in step 5 in your system and copy the bin path:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Now, to create an environment variable open system properties >> Environment Variable >> System variable >> path >> Edit Environment variable
paste the copied link to your environment system and click Ok:
install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Run MongoDB Server (mongod)
To run the MongoDB server (mongod) on Windows, follow these steps:

Step 1. Start MongoDB Service
After setting the environment variable, we will run the MongoDB server, i.e. mongod.
So, open the command prompt and run the following command:
 mongod
When you run this command you will get an error i.e. C:/data/db/ not found. 

Step 2. Create Required Folders
Now, Open C drive and create a folder named "data"
Inside the data folder create another folder named "db".
Step 3. Restart MongoDB
After creating these folders. Again open the command prompt and run the following command:

 mongod
Now, this time the MongoDB server(i.e., mongod) will run successfully.

install-mongodb-on-windows-using-msi

Run the MongoDB Shell (mongosh)
Starting from MongoDB version 5.0, the traditional MongoDB shell (mongo) has been deprecated. The recommended shell for interacting with MongoDB databases is now mongosh, which provides improved functionality, better syntax, and full compatibility with the latest MongoDB features.

Step 1. Connect to MongoDB Server with mongosh
Now we are going to connect our server (mongod) with the mongo shell. So, keep that mongod window
open a new command prompt window and type:
mongosh
You are now connected to the MongoDB shell.
Please do not close the mongod window if you close this window your server will stop working and it will not able to connect with the mongo shell.

run-mongo-shell

Step 2. Create a Database
Now we can make a new database, collections, and documents in our shell. Use the following command within the mongosh shell to create a new database:

use database_name
The use Database_name command makes a new database in the system if it does not exist, if the database exists it uses that database:

use gfg
Step 3: Add Data to a Collection
Insert a document into a collection using:

db.collection_name.insertOne({field: value})
The db.Collection_name command makes a new collection in the gfg database and the insertOne() method inserts the document in the student collection:

db.student.insertOne({Akshay:500})
run-mongodb

Installing MongoDB on Windows Without Admin Rights
Here is Step by Step process on How to Install MongoDB on Windows without Admin Rights -

Step 1: Download the MongoDB ZIP Archive
Get the ZIP version of MongoDB from the official MongoDB website.

Step 2: Extract Files
Extract the ZIP archive to a location on your computer where you have write permissions, such as your user directory.

Step 3: locate the "bin" folder
Navigate to the extracted MongoDB directory and locate the "bin" folder.
Open a command prompt window and navigate to the "bin" folder within the MongoDB directory.
Step 4: Run MongoDB Server Without Installation
Run the MongoDB server by executing the command with the path to the directory where you want to store MongoDB data files. Make sure to use a location where you have write permissions.

Command: mongod.exe --dbpath=path\to\data\directory, replacing "path\to\data\directory"
Step 5: Run MongoDB Shell
MongoDB should now be running locally on your Windows system without the need for admin rights.
You can interact with MongoDB using the MongoDB shell by running the command.
mongo.exe 
By following these steps, you can install and run MongoDB on Windows without admin rights, allowing you to work with MongoDB databases on your local machine.

Important Points to Remember
The old MongoDB shell command mongo is deprecated from MongoDB version 5.0 onward.
Always use the modern mongosh command for compatibility with new features.
Ensure the MongoDB server (mongod) runs continuously while interacting through mongosh.
